[ Background Music ]
>> And I think many people
today don't know what
to believe anymore.
>> People basically need to keep
on to help uncover
what really happened.
>> I felt like something
was watching me.
>> We weren't given
all the information.
We weren't told the
entire story.
>> George Noory:
Well, welcome back
to another edition
of  Beyond Belief.
You know, I'm a Gemini,
which means I have two
distinct personalities.
No you don't.
Yes I do. And with us,
our special guest,
Dr. Peter Breggin.
He is a Harvard trained
psychiatrist, noted author,
frequent guest on
our radio program,
Coast to Coast A.M.
Peter, always a pleasure.
Welcome back.
How are you?
>> Peter Breggin:
Good to see you.
>> Noory: How did you
become a psychiatrist?
Not a doctor, but what
got you into psychiatry?
>> Breggin: Well,
I was 18 years old.
I thought I was going
to be a professor
of history and literature.
I was in an honors program
at Harvard in that field.
A friend invited me out to
a state mental hospital.
I started working with patients.
>> Noory: Ah.
>> Breggin: So I created a
program -- and I'm just a kid.
I'm now a sophomore
maybe in college.
I created a program
where a bunch
of us got our own patients.
Like about 12 students.
>> Noory: Real patients?
>> Breggin: Yes.
In the state hospital.
>> Noory: Okay.
>> Breggin: I had to
twist a lot of arms.
We had a big program,
200 people.
So they didn't want
me, you know,
putting the program
somewhere else.
And they were afraid we were
going to ruin the patients.
And we actually ended up getting
all of them out of the hospital.
Backward lost souls.
>> Noory: Dramatic.
>> Breggin: So this
became really a big deal.
And I thought well maybe this
is what I'm supposed to do.
So I called my dad on the phone.
>> Noory: Love it.
>> Breggin: My dad never said
but three words maybe
every month or two to me.
And I said: Dad, I want to get
into the mental health field.
And there's psychology,
there's social work,
there's medicine and psychiatry.
>> Noory: Was your dad a doctor.
>> Breggin: My dad?
No, he's an accountant.
>> Noory: He was an accountant.
Okay.
>> Breggin: Very practical man.
So he said to me,
he said: Peter.
Who has the strongest
trade union?
I said: Medicine.
Psychiatry.
He said: I'll send
you to medical school.
>> Noory: And he did.
>> Breggin: And he did.
>> Noory: And you did it.
>> Breggin: And I did it.
>> Noory: At what point,
when you got into psychiatry
in a professional
way, did you say,
this is not what I
thought it was going to be?
>> Breggin: Well, I was at,
you know, sort of the top
of the ranks when I graduated.
And I went to the National
Institute of Mental Health
as a consultant and kind
of almost a post-doc.
>> Noory: You were a
giant in the field.
>> Breggin: I was a
young upcoming person.
I had two years at the National
Institute of Mental Health.
>> Noory: You were Sigmund
Freud all over again.
>> Breggin: Well, you know, when
I was young, that was, you know,
that was kind of
fantasy till I realized
that he was pretty twisted --
>> Noory: himself, yeah.
>> Breggin: -- person.
And his ideas were
often twisted.
And I realized being in the
center of the establishment
that this was going totally
to the drugs and biology.
A few years earlier,
psychiatry had been also
about psychology
and social life.
And we were looking at how what
we called mental illness was a
problem of economics and of
poverty and racism, sexism.
We were looking at all
these issues that went
into making people
unhappy and desperate.
And there was another
larger branch
that said it's biological
and drugs.
But now the smaller
branch was just snowed
under because there was no
money flowing from that.
The money was flowing
from the drug companies.
>> Noory: It's all
about the money.
>> Breggin: And psychiatry went
with the money and the power.
And then I looked around and
said, well, guess I'm not going
to be what I thought I was
going to be in the field.
And I ended up realizing
that my obligation was
to speak truth to the power.
>> Noory: You are opposed
to medicating patients.
It has been, I think, your
Bible to get that message out.
What about drug to children?
Let's take a look.
>> We haven't, and I'm
out of my element here
and step my toe in the water.
We haven't talked about
specific diagnoses,
but there is something
called ADHD,
attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder.
Do you believe such
a disorder exists?
Is that a diagnosis that --
>> Breggin: I'm laughing.
Because you what it is?
It's a list of things
that annoy teachers:
speaks out of turn,
squirms in seat.
These are the official symptoms.
Interrupts to give
answers before a question's
fully answered.
What the proponents
of the drugs did,
working with the drug companies,
was take all the behaviors
in a classroom that
require attention and said
to the educational people, you
can control these with a drug.
And by God, when you
suppress spontaneity with one
of these drugs, all these
irritating needy kinds
of things go away
for a little while.
The brain fights back and they
always come back, the symptoms,
or at least most of the time.
And then often you
get a second drug,
a third drug, a fourth drug.
>> Noory: How big is this
problem of drugging kids?
>> Breggin: Well,
it's just huge.
If we look only at the stimulant
drugs like Ritalin and Focalin
and Adderall, the drugs that
are used supposedly for ADHD --
>> Noory: Yeah.
>> Breggin: Which is not
a disease or a disorder,
20 percent of boys are being
diagnosed in high school.
>> Noory: 20 percent?
That's huge.
>> Breggin: It's huge.
And that's really just
looking at a segment.
It doesn't tell you how many
over a four year period.
And it doesn't tell you how
many are being labeled bipolar
and how many are being
labeled depressed.
I mean, it is entirely
possible that 50 percent
of our boys are being diagnosed
and that something well
over 20 percent are
being medicated.
>> Noory: Why the boys?
Why not the women, the girls?
>> Breggin: Because the goal
is passivity in the classroom.
And passivity and
facility in the home.
And girls tend to be
more docile and passive.
Unfortunately -- now the
drug companies noticed this.
And they noticed that the
drugging of the boys was nine
to one compared to girls,
so they were losing
the girls' market.
So they --
>> Noory: Unless we
have boy shooters.
And we'll get into that.
>> Breggin: So they redefined
ADHD to include inattention,
not just hyperactivity.
So now when the little girl
is daydreaming, writing poetry
in her head in class, they
can diagnose her, too.
It was a marketing decision.
>> Noory: Yes.
>> Breggin: I mean, because
what's the relationship
between inattention,
the daydreaming girl
and the hyperactive boy?
The common thing is
that the drug's going
to suppress the spontaneity
of both.
>> Noory: Of everything.
>> Breggin: So the girl's
going to stop daydreaming.
She's going to stare
at the teacher.
The boy's going to stop being
hyperactive and impulsive.
He's going to stare
at the teacher.
>> Noory: Why is it that
it's young men or boys
who are shooters at schools or
navy yards or places like that?
Why is it that those
people are serial killers?
Men, not women?
Why? What's the difference here?
Is there some kind of sexual
problem that's creating this?
What's doing it?
>> Breggin: Well, I think
this is a point where biology
and cultural evolution
and culture
and family life come together.
There's no doubt that men are
built differently than women,
that testosterone has a
different effects than estrogen.
There's no question that it was
mostly men 300,000 years ago
when we were little hominids
that were gathering around,
you know, a giant elephant with
huge tusks four times the size
of an African elephant and
killing it with pointed spears.
I mean, that's us.
And we have the capacity
to be violent.
to be social.
And I don't think there's
much doubt that in young boys,
that capacity for violence
comes out more strongly.
And I think the capacity for
social comes out more strongly
in the beginning with the girls.
So the boys are wrestling
more with the problems
of aggressivity and assertion.
And the society also,
until recently at least,
accepted more aggressivity
for boys --
I think that's coming
to an end --
and expected girls
to be more passive.
There's been a universal idea in
even American culture and worse
in the rest of the world
that women were supposed
to be unassertive.
So part of comes from
just who boys are growing
through human evolution.
But the other part of it that
is so incredibly important is
that there is a kind of
humiliation that is heaped
on boys almost ritualistically
by the jocks, by other boys.
>> Noory: It's constant.
>> Breggin: It's a constant.
It's a big deal.
Every boy, every boy, has to
deal with this on some level.
Now the girls get their
own terrible infighting.
But the humiliation of the boys
has been accepted as something
that you can't do
anything about.
And nothing, nothing
encourages violence more
than being humiliated.
Any of us who have been
humiliated and put down
and shamed know that
the first response
to it is, I'll show you.
You won't do this to me.
I'm not powerless.
I can strike back.
>> Noory: I'll lash out.
>> Breggin: I'll lash out.
And it's in that context
that we end up with
so many boys becoming violent.
Now, the other half of
that is that the answer
to helping those boys is, of
course, to work with families,
to work with teachers, to
work with school counselors,
to do two things: Zero
tolerance of bullying
and helping young men
who aren't six foot two
and a quarterback learn
that they have value.
They have worth.
And that they don't have to
prove themselves physically.
They are human beings.
>> Noory: That takes a lot
of work to convince them.
>> Breggin: That's right.
But that's the work.
Instead, all these young
boys that get in trouble,
every one of them just
about, gets into psychiatry.
>> Noory: Yeah.
>> Breggin: And psychiatry
doesn't offer that anymore.
>> Noory: It doesn't know
what to do about it, does it?
>> Breggin: Well, it
thinks it knows what to do.
>> Noory: Prescribe!
>> Breggin: Diagnose
and prescribe.
And that further humiliates.
And every known drug -- I
don't care if it's alcohol
or marijuana, psychiatric
drugs, they impair the judgment.
>> Noory: Right.
In some form affect --
>> Breggin: They
impair the self-control.
>> Noory: That's right.
>> Breggin: And the psych drugs,
many of them have
suicide labels on them.
Suicide and violence,
very close.
Many of them have
elaborate discussions
of causing aggressivity
and violence.
The medication guide that
doctors are supposed to give
to the families of
children on anti-depressants
and adults says, look
out for violence.
But this isn't given out,
the medication guides.
The psychiatrists don't
warn about it by and large,
even though they should
by every standard.
And so the kids are
put on these drugs.
They have no idea
what's making them crazy.
>> Noory: How would you
like to take a phone call?
>> Breggin: Sure.
>> Noory: Let's do it.
Peter Breggin.
And let's take a call.
>> Hello Peter.
I'm Carrie [assumed spelling].
Why is it that the medical
association allows the use
of dangerous mood drugs?
>> Noory: Why is that?
>> Breggin: Well, the medical --
the American Medical
Association,
the American Psychiatric
and even now the non-medical
American Psychological
Association are all in bed
with the drug companies.
>> Noory: They're funded
by the drug companies.
>> Breggin: They're funded.
The Psychiatric Association's
journals depend entirely
on money flowing in from
the drug companies for ads.
The Psychiatric Association
gets gifts
from the drug companies
all the time.
The conferences are sponsored
by the drug companies.
Psychiatric conventions look
like drug company carnivals.
I mean, they have huge displays.
You walk onto beautiful women
and free samples,
all about the drugs.
I get two psychiatric
journals for free that are --
and the circulation's paid
for by the drug companies.
You can't tell the difference
between a psychiatrist
and a drug salesman.
You really can't.
And the drug salespersons
come around,
the psychiatrists get lunch,
the pediatricians get lunch.
The whole family
doctor's staff gets lunch.
They get trips.
They get paid to go talk
in the local communities.
It is a such an invasive
[inaudible].
>> Noory: In the old days,
Peter, did they give commissions
to doctors if they
used their drugs?
>> Breggin: They used to give
more outright commissions.
Now, you get to go to an
educational seminar in Hawaii.
>> Noory: Nice.
>> Breggin: Nice.
>> Breggin: It's
a dreadful system.
And the AMA and the Psychiatric
Associations, they can't live
without the drug company money.
And the reason they can't live
without drug company monies,
particularly my association.
I'm a member.
They can't get rid of me.
I'm a member of the American
Psychiatric Association.
>> Noory: In good standing.
>> Breggin: In good standing.
That's a long story for another
show, but in good standing.
And the reason they
can't get rid
of the drug companies is they
have nothing else to offer.
>> Noory: Right.
>> Breggin: They're not
trained in counseling.
They're not trained
in family therapy.
There's all these other people
out there, social workers,
psychologists, counselors,
family therapists.
Robbed of their drugs, it
would be like taking hammers
and saws away from a carpenter.
>> Noory: When these drug
researchers are coming
up with their new
product, are they thinking
that this is going
to benefit mankind?
Or are they saying, this
is going to make some money
for me and the company?
>> Breggin: Everybody makes
believe that they're doing good.
But the process is
very straightforward.
The orders on developing
a new drug come
from the marketing department.
>> Noory: Yeah.
>> Breggin: You know, hey --
>> Noory: We need this.
Now develop it, right?
>> Breggin: We're going
to push the pressure now.
We're pushing anxiety now.
You know, the --
>> Noory: It's the hot thing.
>> Breggin: It's the hot thing.
When valium was the drug,
it was the age of anxiety.
And then Prozac came
along, and we were suddenly
in the age of depression.
>> Noory: Yeah.
>> Breggin: That's the
power over culture.
>> Noory: Marketing
pushes the [inaudible].
>> Breggin: It changes culture.
It changes culture.
There was a time
when Newsweek had --
>> Noory: Unbelievable.
>> Breggin: Newsweek
had Pill of the Year.
And it was Prozac.
That's like --
>> Noory: They'll come up with
a pill to induce intuitiveness.
And they'll sell
it to everybody.
You can be intuitive!
You'll be able to
predict the future.
Take this pill.
>> Breggin: We've got a
drug called Intuit [laughs].
>> Noory: Let's take another
question for Dr. Peter Breggin.
Here we go.
>> Hi Peter.
This is Mark and
I wanted to know,
what made you want
to become a doctor?
>> Noory: Well, there we go.
We got the part of
that from your dad,
the accountant who backed you.
>> Breggin: Yeah.
I wanted to help
people by psychosocial,
educational, caring approaches.
That was clear to me
as a kid in college.
And I could well have gone into
psychology or some other field.
But it was that famous
conversation, now --
it wasn't famous before our show
-- where my dad said: Well, son.
Who has the better trade union?
And I said: Dad, no doubt
the AMA and medicine.
And he said, well --
>> Noory: Go for it.
>> Breggin: Go for it.
I'll help you go
to medical school.
>> Noory: And did you enjoy
it while you were doing it?
While you were going to school?
>> Breggin: I actually
got into medical school
in this -- [inaudible] I got in.
But I actually enjoyed it.
For one, thing I was so
scared that I couldn't do it
that I studied every night
for the first time in my life.
And boy does that
make school easier
when you study every night.
I did four years of intensive
research on psychophysiology
in animals and the effects of
adrenalin, published papers.
My first papers are in the
field of psychopharmacology.
And do you remember Ben Spock,
the most famous pediatrician
in the world?
>> Noory: Absolutely.
Dr. Spock.
>> Breggin: He was my
private tutor for four years
in a special family program.
I actually enjoyed medicine.
I was asked to stay
on as a pediatrician
and to go into the pediatrics.
>> Noory: Why was he so
well-known at that time?
I mean, everybody knew the guy.
>> Breggin: He had the
best-selling book next
to the Bible in the whole world.
>> Noory: Was it his books
that got him on the page?
>> Breggin: Oh, yeah.
His books were the books that
transformed, perhaps overly so,
us from a harsh child
rearing to a more permissive
and caring and loving.
And Ben Spock, one of the things
I learned from him by being
with him with a patient was that
you can be the most famous doc
in the world and you're humble
and respectful when dealing
with a patient from
inner city Cleveland.
>> Noory: Absolutely.
>> Breggin: And I mean, it
was just a reinforcement
of what I already knew.
>> Noory: That's like Dr.
Patch Adams, whom I know.
>> Breggin: Yeah.
>> Noory: Same kind of thing.
So exactly what is
ADHD, Dr. Breggin?
>> Breggin: It's a collection
of behaviors that annoy teachers
and even get them really mad.
It's a collection of behaviors
that require the
attention of teachers.
This is going to sound awfully
cynical, but this is a fact.
Psychologists and
psychiatrists working
with the drug companies
collected what were the
behaviors that teachers
found difficult?
>> Noory: In kids.
>> Breggin: In kids.
Because they knew that the
drugs that were being used,
and the same drugs now
like Ritalin and Adderall.
Adderall is -- dexedrine
was used earlier.
They knew that they
could suppress behaviors.
So they came up with
a diagnosis.
And the ADHD diagnosis
includes things like this:
squirming in seat,
talking out of turn --
>> Noory: What!
>> Breggin: -- interrupting
the teacher
when she asks a question before
she's finished answering.
This is the diagnosis.
They built it around stuff
that teachers were --
especially teachers who aren't
good or teachers who are working
under bad circumstances.
Things teachers couldn't handle.
Then you give the pill and
the kids are no longer talking
out of turn.
Kid's no longer squirming
because the kid has been
suppressed in spontaneity.
>> Noory: They're brain
dead, aren't they?
>> Breggin: Well, it's --
>> Noory: I don't
like to use that term.
>> Breggin: I don't
like to use that it.
>> Noory: I mean, it's true.
>> Breggin: But they
are more robotic.
In fact, the psychiatric
literature says one
of the side-effects of
these drugs is roboticism.
So they know what they're doing.
>> Noory: Gosh.
It's a huge problem.
>> Breggin: Oh, it's a tragedy.
I think it's America's
form of child abuse.
We're going to look back and
we're going to say, all right,
we recognize sexual abuse as
being a horrendous problem.
We still haven't
done enough about it.
We've realized that
very harsh punishments,
beating children, were not good.
And we realized that the
religious schools shouldn't whip
people and so on.
So instead, we drug them, which
is as bad or worse than some
of the more horrendous
physical things you can do.
Because what psychiatry does is
intervene and suppress you right
in the center of yourself.
>> Noory: By drugging them,
it's the easy way for them.
It's the easy way out.
>> Breggin: And it's
the direct way.
It's the direct way.
That's what lobotomy and shock
and the drugs have in common.
It's when psychiatry
realized that the way
to make people docile in
mental hospitals was to go
and stop beating them
and drowning them and all
that stuff, just
injure the brain.
And now that approach,
which used to be a
mental hospital approach,
is throughout the society.
>> Noory: We dumb it down.
Really numb it down, basically.
>> Breggin: Numb it down,
throughout the society now.
>> Noory: We talked a little
bit in our last program
about the bullies in school.
Let's talk a little
bit more about that.
We all have cited examples
in our life, I think,
about a bully out there.
I put a stop to one who used
to bully everybody, everybody.
But he left me alone.
But he bullied everybody.
And one day I noticed
in the swimming pool,
during physical education,
he was standing
in the shallow end
petrified of the water.
Peter, he was shivering
like a dog
that had come out
of the cold wet.
And I realized, he's scared
to death of the water.
>> Breggin: Yeah.
>> Noory: Now this is the bully.
>> Noory: And so I
went up to the bully,
who had terrorized
everybody in school.
And I dunk him under the water.
And I did it on the
auspices of playing a game.
But I held him under.
And he squirming and --
you know, he's going
crazy under there.
And I let him back up.
I wasn't going to drown the kid.
I timed it, right?
I said I hope he could hold
his breath for 30 seconds.
>> Breggin: Good work.
>> Noory: And he pops
up and he's gasping
and screaming and crying.
And I said: The next
time you bully somebody,
I may keep you down there.
>> Breggin: Yeah.
>> Noory: And he stopped.
>> Noory: He stopped.
I don't know if I did
the right thing or not.
>> Breggin: Well, I think
you did the right thing.
>> Noory: I stopped him.
>> Breggin: You know, it's one
more thing we have in common.
In high school I was five
- four and a 135 pounds.
But I played football.
I ran track.
And for a lot of times I
was president of the class.
And I was Jewish, where there
are a lot of six-footers
who picked on -- wanted to pick
on me or pick on my friends.
And I got a reputation, George,
that no matter how big you were,
I didn't quit until
I'd won the fight.
>> Noory: Yeah.
>> Breggin: And I used to
actually protect some of my --
>> Noory: You just started
pounding away if you had to.
>> Breggin: And it
was the making
of the future psychiatric
reformer.
Because I do think that
somehow I got instilled
in me this physical
determination despite my rather,
you know, I was strong,
but I was small.
>> Noory: Yeah.
>> Breggin: And I think that
that helped me a lot growing up.
But I'll tell you
something, George,
being that way terrified me.
It wasn't like, man, I'm
going to [inaudible].
>> Noory: You were
unhappy doing this.
>> Breggin: Scared to death.
And when somebody would
pick on me and I had to make
that decision to fight,
there was the shame
and the humiliation and
are you going to fight?
Or am I going to back off?
And I couldn't bear the
humiliation of backing off.
I had to be a young man before
I got over that and said,
I'm not going to
fight with anybody.
This is ridiculous.
I used my mind, my art.
>> Noory: Never got
into a fight in school.
I never got into
a fight in school.
I always either talked my
way out of something --
>> Breggin: Well,
you were smarter than
>> Noory: -- or negotiated.
>> Breggin: You were more
mature than me at an early age.
And I really do mean that.
I mean, I was stuck
within this shame thing.
Now, I was not going to allow
anybody -- and that is a burden.
And most kids, they don't
have all the friends I had.
I was, you know,
I was an athlete.
I was, you know, a
leader in the school.
So I had friends.
I wasn't all alone.
But now imagine that you're
small or you're tall and thin,
which is a very big target.
>> Noory: Yeah.
>> Breggin: And everywhere
you go you've got
to be making decisions
about what to do.
Is somebody making fun of you?
Because you're a girl,
because of your skin color,
because of the way you look.
>> Noory: Just walk away.
>> Breggin: Because
of a problem.
>> Noory: Just keep
walking away.
>> Breggin: Yeah, but that
doesn't always work, either.
It doesn't always work.
>> Noory: Well, you know,
we talked about the case
where the father tried to get
his bully son and straighten him
out by standing on a corner
of a street saying: Honk!
I'm a bully.
And you didn't agree with
the way the father did that.
>> Breggin: No.
I think he's -- anybody
who would --
>> Noory: Humiliate.
>> Breggin: -- humiliate
publicly his son, you know,
like he's back in
the Puritan times,
basically put him in stocks.
You know, make him stand there
with a sign on a street corner.
Anybody who's got that
rage at his own son,
and that determination
to humiliate his own
son has taught his son
to go humiliate other people.
I'm guessing that.
I don't know the man.
It's not a psychiatric
diagnosis.
But what I see is not good.
And what a bully needs is to
be taught, by his parents, a,
limits: Son, just
don't do that anymore.
>> Noory: Don't do that.
>> Breggin: There'll
be consequences.
>> Noory: We didn't
raise you to do that.
>> Breggin: Right.
Now, I want you do also,
son, think about the effects
on the kids you're bullying.
We know that in fact,
both bullies
and their victims suffer.
>> Noory: Right.
>> Breggin: They both --
>> Noory: They both suffer.
>> Breggin: They have the scars.
It is not good to
abuse human beings.
That's why my psychiatry
friends all look depressed.
You go to a psychiatric
convention,
they don't look like
happy people.
Because they're doing all
these things to people.
Bullies don't feel good.
But even more importantly,
victims can be destroyed
by what is done to them.
>> Noory: And Peter, let's
take another question for you
and see what one of our
viewers has in mind.
>> Hi Peter.
Dave from New York here.
Wondering if you think
there are certain cases
where children do belong
on psychiatric drugs?
>> Noory: Well, I would
think you would say no,
but I'm not putting
words in your mouth.
>> Breggin: Absolutely no.
I got into a debate with a
pediatrician who said: Well,
I only drug 3 percent of the
children who come to see me.
Don't you think some
children should get drugged?
I said: Doc, I wouldn't
know which one to poison.
How do I pick them out?
>> Noory: Jeez.
>> Breggin: It didn't
go well after that.
He got upset.
>> Noory: Totally opposed, then?
>> Breggin: Oh, my God, yes.
It's worse than some people
will say, this works for me!
>> Noory: Well, we've
taken calls
from people who have said that.
>> Breggin: Yeah.
Well, you know, just
focusing on the kids who's
to say it works for the kids?
It makes them more docile.
It makes them quieter.
It makes them more manageable.
And it permanently, over the
years, harms their brains.
It commonly is the
psychiatric gateway drug
to then getting labeled bipolar
because you've gotten agitated
by the stimulants for ADHD.
And now you're getting
sedative drugs.
You're getting antidepressant
drugs.
Pretty soon you're getting
antipsychotic drugs.
And I'll sit with a family.
The kid is now on five drugs.
They've come to me
out of desperation.
>> Noory: Way too much.
>> Breggin: Well,
one's way too much,
and five is horrendous
abuse by the doctors.
And we'll start talking.
And I'll say well how
did it get started?
Oh, my God.
Then suddenly it'll
dawn on them.
He was a normal kid who the
teacher said he'd do better
on drugs.
And he's not a normal kid.
>> Noory: And he never did.
And he never will.
>> Breggin: Oh, he
became a very disturbed,
injured human being
on the drugs.
This is happening to
millions of children.
They're being --
>> Noory: It's an epidemic.
>> Breggin: Yes.
And you can actually trace the
huge rise in child disability.
It parallels the huge
drugging of children.
We are disabling
millions of kids.
>> Noory: Let's talk
a little bit
about psychotherapy
and what that means.
>> Breggin: There's
never been anything
like the therapy setting
except for the priesthood
in the history of humanity.
Therapists are honored,
privileged, to actually sit
and talk with and share
with another human
being about their life.
This is incredible and it should
be treated as a sacred trust.
And if you approach the people
you deal with in your practice
in terms of wanting
to care about them
and to actually develop
a relationship
where treasure the
person, who may
or may not be able
to give that back.
That's not the issue.
And if you view what you're
doing as a sacred trust,
that you really need to
handle with care and courtesy
and kindness at all
times, you're going
to help people, period.
You're going to help people.
>> Noory: So what's
the difference
between psychiatry
and psychotherapy?
>> Breggin: Well, they have
no relationship to each other.
>> Noory: At all?
>> Breggin: Psychiatry is the
sub-specialty of medicine.
Nowadays the psychiatrists are
trained in pseudo-medicine,
diagnosing, drugging, locking
people up against their will,
doing things to the brain
and the body of the person,
including taking
away their freedom.
Years ago, some of these same
psychiatrists did psychotherapy.
Now, that's pretty much unheard
of because it doesn't pay.
Psychotherapy is talking.
It's like what you and I
are doing, only the focus is
on one person, say I'm
the client or the patient,
and my problems, and you're
trying to help me with that.
So it's a one-to-one,
it's incredibly special.
Needs to be protected.
And it needs to be
done with wisdom,
caring and respect
and experience.
It's a totally different process
than a 10-minute discussion
in which you're diagnosed
and drugged.
It is actually the opposite.
So a good psychotherapy is
like an educational process,
a spiritual process, a
thoughtful, caring process.
Psychiatry is an
assembly-line drugging process.
They have nothing to do
with each other anymore.
And a lot of therapists
have been falsely convinced
that if therapy isn't
going well,
they should send their
patient to a psychiatrist.
I say, if therapy
isn't going well,
reexamine yourself
as a therapist.
>> Noory: Yeah, and see
what you're doing wrong.
>> Breggin: Yeah.
Don't send them for drugging.
>> Noory: What do you recommend
to somebody right now who's
watching this show who's taking
mood altering drugs,
prescription drugs,
and they've just heard you?
What do they do?
>> Breggin: Well, first, you
know, I've written about it
in psychiatric drug withdrawal.
Don't just stop your
drugs immediately
because your brain is
accustomed to the drugs
and you'll have a terrible time
if you're taken off
all your drugs at once.
It can lead to violence and
suicide to even to mania.
>> Noory: Yeah, got
to be careful.
>> Breggin: Any,
almost any, say.
So you want to come off
drugs slowly, carefully.
You want to wrap around process.
>> Noory: Under a doctor's care,
but it's the doctor
who prescribed it.
>> Breggin: Well,
a clinician's care.
Maybe it's your therapist
that's going to help you.
Maybe your -- go to your GP and
say, look, I've got a therapist
who wants to work with me.
Would you do the prescribing?
Or maybe talk your
psychiatrist into it.
Some listen, not too many.
Most get angry.
It's actually a little
dangerous.
>> Noory: They do get angry.
Because they're the
ones that prescribed it
and they think you're
coming after them.
>> Breggin: Yeah.
>> Noory: Peter, thank you
for being on the program.
Appreciate it.
This is Dr. Peter
Breggin, of course.
He's written a number of
books about psychiatry.
He is opposed to the medicating
of people when it has to come
to psychiatric issues as well.
Thanks again, Peter.
Always a pleasure.
>> Breggin: Oh, thank you.
You're doing great work.
>> Noory: You've been
watching  Beyond Belief.
[ Music ]